---
title: "Computational insights into human expertise for familiar and unfamiliar face recognition"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/psyarxiv2019
excerpt: 'We investigated the nature of experience underlying human-level performance in unfamiliar face recognition, and how familiarity may build upon general face representations to provide a robust recognition advantage for known individuals'
date: 2019-10-24
venue: 'PsyArvix'
citation: 'Blauch N., Behrmann M., Plaut D.C. (2019). Computational insights into human expertise for familiar and unfamiliar face recognition. PsyArviv. doi:10.31234/OSF.IO/BV5MP'
---

[[PDF]](https://psyarxiv.com/bv5mp)

## Abstract
Faces have provided a window into expert human perceptual mechanisms. But, if humans are face experts, why is it so difficult for humans to determine identity matches in images of unfamiliar faces? One explanation offered is that because human expertise in face recognition is limited to familiar faces, unfamiliar faces can be processed only by less sophisticated pictorial metrics (Young and Burton, 2018). We sought to develop an alternative account in which we explore the perceptual representations underlying unfamiliar face recognition performance, and then offer a mechanistic understanding of how familiarity may build upon these representations to form robust identity representations. We adopted a computational approach in which we probed representations learned by a high-performing deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) trained for visual recognition. By manipulating prior experience of the network, we found that previous experience with faces, but not with objects in general, enabled the network to achieve human-level performance in matching unfamiliar faces, and that increasing experience with faces led to consistently increasing performance. By simulating the role of familiarity through fine-tuning the network on a separate set of images of the same individuals, we found that extensive prior experience with faces led to superior learning of novel identities, and a sharp boost in verification. Further, this familiar face advantage did not require changes to perceptual representations, but only a learned mapping between existing perceptual representations and identity. Our results suggest that humans can extract substantial identity-related information from unfamiliar faces, a skill which is acquired over a lifetime of experience recognizing faces, but which may be fundamentally limited by the variability of face images. With repeated experience with the appearance and associated biographical information of a specific individual, a distinct identity-based representation may be activated from even highly variable face images, providing a sharp advantage in identity matching. Thus, although familiarity permits additional post-perceptual processing, humans are clearly perceptual experts in recognizing even unfamiliar faces.
